#+SETUPFILE: setup.org
#+TITLE: A Coffeehouse Conversation on the Turing Test

May, 1981

By Douglas R. Hofstadter

/Participants in the dialog: Chris, a physics student; Pat, a biology
student; Sandy, a philosophy student./

*Chris:* Sandy, I want to thank you for suggesting that I read Alan
Turing's article "[[http://www.csee.umbc.edu/courses/471/papers/turing.pdf][Computing Machinery and Intelligence]]." It's a
wonderful piece and certainly made me think---and think about my
thinking.

*Sandy:* Glad to hear it. Are you still as much of a skeptic about
artificial intelligence as you used to be?

*Chris:* You've got me wrong. I'm not against artificial intelligence;
I think it's wonderful stuff---perhaps a little crazy, but why not? I
simply am convinced that you AI advocates have far underestimated the
human mind, and that there are things a computer will never, ever be
able to do. For instance, can you imagine a computer writing a Proust
novel? The richness of imagination, the complexity of the
characters---

*Sandy:* Rome wasn't built in a day!

*Chris:* In the article, Turing comes through as an interesting
 person. Is he still alive?

*Sandy:* No, he died back in 1954, at just 41. He'd be only 70 or so
 now, although he is such a legendary figure it seems strange to think
 that he could still be living today.

*Chris:* How did he die?

*Sandy:* Almost certainly suicide. He was homosexual, and had to deal
 with some pretty barbaric treatment and stupidity from the outside
 world. In the end, it got to be too much, and he killed himself.

*Chris:* That's horrendous, especially in this day and age.

*Sandy:* I know. What really saddens me is that he never got to see
 the amazing progress in computing machinery and theory that has taken
 place since 1954. Can you imagine how he'd have been wowed?

*Chris:* Yeah . . .

*Pat:* Hey, are you two going to clue me in as to what this Turing
 article is about?

*Sandy:* It is really about two things. One is the question "Can a
 machine think?"---or rather, "Will a machine ever think?" The way
 Turing answers the question---he thinks the answer is yes, by the
 way---is by batting down a series of objections to the idea, one after
 another. The other point he tries to make is that, as it stands, the
 question is not meaningful. It's too full of emotional
 connotations. Many people are upset by the suggestion that people are
 machines, or that machines might think. Turing tries to defuse the
 question by casting it in less emotional terms. For instance, what do
 you think, Pat, of the idea of thinking machines?

*Pat:* Frankly, I find the term confusing. You know what confuses me?
 It's those ads in the newspapers and on TV that talk about "products
 that think" or "intelligent ovens" or whatever. I just don't know how
 seriously to take them.

*Sandy:* I know the kind of ads you mean, and they probably confuse a
 lot of people. On the one hand, we're always hearing the refrain
 "Computers are really dumb; you have to spell everything out for them
 in words of one syllable"---yet on the other hand, we're constantly
 bombarded with advertising hype about "smart products."

*Chris:* That's certainly true. Do you know that one company has even
 taken to calling its products "dumb terminals"
 [fn::E.g. [[http://www.old-computers.com/fun/stupid_scans/stupid_dumb-terminal.jpg][this advertisement]]] in order to stand out
 from the crowd?

*Sandy:* That's a pretty clever gimmick, but even so it just
 contributes to the trend toward obfuscation. The term "electronic
 brain" always comes to my mind when I'm thinking about this. Many
 people swallow it completely, and others reject it out of hand. It
 takes patience to sort out the issues and decide how much of it makes
 sense.

*Pat:* Does Turing suggest some way of resolving it, some kind of IQ
 test for machines?

*Sandy:* That would be very interesting, but no machine could yet come
 close to taking an IQ test. Instead, Turing proposes a test that
 theoretically could be applied to any machine to determine whether or
 not it can think.

*Pat:* Does the test give a clear-cut yes-or-no answer? I'd be
 skeptical if it claimed to.

*Sandy:* No, it doesn't claim to. In a way that's one of its
 advantages. It shows how the borderline is quite fuzzy and how subtle
 the whole question is.

*Pat:* And so, as usual in philosophy, it's all just a question of
 words!

*Sandy:* Maybe, but they're emotionally charged words, and so it's
 important, it seems to me, to explore the issues and try to map out
 the meanings of the crucial words. The issues are fundamental to our
 concept of ourselves. So we shouldn't just sweep them under the rug.

*Pat:* Okay, so tell me how Turing's test works.

*Sandy:* The idea is based on what he calls the /Imitation
 Game/. Imagine that a man and a woman go into separate rooms, and
 from there they can be interrogated by a third party via some sort of
 teletype set-up. The third party can address questions to either
 room, but has no idea which person is in which room. For the
 interrogator, the idea is to determine which room the woman is
 in. The woman, by her answers, tries to help the interrogator as much
 as she can. The man, though, is doing his best to bamboozle the
 interrogator, by responding as he thinks a woman might. And if he
 succeeds in fooling the interrogator...

*Pat:* The interrogator only gets to see written words, eh? And the
 sex of the author is supposed to shine through? That game sounds like
 a good challenge. I'd certainly like to take part in it
 someday. Would the interrogator have met either the man or the woman
 before the test began? Would any of them know any of the others?

*Sandy:* That would probably be a bad idea. All kinds of subliminal
 cueing might occur if the interrogator knew one or both of them. It
 would certainly be best if all three people were totally unknown to
 one another.

*Pat:* Could you ask any questions at all, with no holds barred?

*Sandy:* Absolutely. That's the whole idea!

*Pat:* Don't you think, then, that pretty quickly it would degenerate
 into sex-oriented questions? I mean, I can imagine the man, overeager
 to act convincing, giving away the game by answering some very blunt
 questions that most women would find too personal to answer, even
 through an anonymous computer connection.

*Sandy:* That's a nice observation. I wonder if it's true...

*Chris:* Another possibility would be to probe for knowledge of minute
 aspects of traditional sex-role differences, by asking about such
 things as dress sizes and so on. The psychology of the Imitation Game
 could get pretty subtle. I suppose whether the interrogator was a
 woman or a man would make a difference. Don't you think that a woman
 could spot some telltale differences more quickly than a man could?

*Pat:* If so, maybe the best way to tell a man from a woman is to let
 each of them play interrogator in an Imitation Game and see which of
 the two is better at telling a man from a woman!

*Sandy:* Hmm... that's a droll twist. Oh well, I don't know if this
 original version of the Imitation Game has ever been seriously tried
 out, despite the fact that it would be relatively easy to do with
 modern computer terminals. I have to admit, though, that I'm not at
 all sure what it would prove, whichever way it turned out.

*Pat:* I was wondering about that. What would it prove if the
 interrogator---say a woman---couldn't tell correctly which person was the
 woman? It certainly wouldn't prove that the man was a woman!

*Sandy:* Exactly! What I find funny is that although I strongly
 believe in the idea of the Turing Test, I'm not so sure I understand
 the point of its basis, the Imitation Game.

*Chris:* As for me, I'm not any happier with the Turing Test as a test
 for thinking machines than I am with the Imitation Game as a test for
 femininity.

*Pat:* From what you two are saying, I gather the Turing Test is some
 kind of extension of the Imitation Game, only involving a machine and
 a person instead of a man and a woman.

*Sandy:* That's the idea. The machine tries its hardest to convince
 the interrogator that it is the human being, and the human tries to
 make it clear that he or she is not the computer.

*Pat:* The machine /tries/? Isn't that a loaded way of putting it?

*Sandy:* Sorry, but that seemed the most natural way to say it.

*Pat:* Anyway, this test sounds pretty interesting. But how do you
 know that it will get at the essence of thinking? Maybe it's testing
 for the wrong things. Maybe, just to take a random illustration,
 someone would feel that a machine was able to think only if it could
 dance so well that you couldn't tell it was a machine. Or someone
 else could suggest some other characteristic. What's so sacred about
 being able to fool people by typing at them?

*Sandy:* I don't see how you can say such a thing. I've heard that
 objection before, but frankly, it baffles me. So what if the machine
 can't tap-dance or drop a rock on your toe? If it can discourse
 intelligently on any subject you want, then it has shown that it can
 think---to me, at least! As I see it, Turing has drawn, in one clean
 stroke, a clear division between thinking and other aspects of being
 human.

*Pat:* Now you're the baffling one. If you couldn't conclude anything
from a man's ability to win at the Imitation Game, how could you
conclude anything from a machine's ability to win at the Turing Game?

*Chris:* Good question.

*Sandy:* It seems to me that you could conclude something from a man's
 win in the Imitation Game. You wouldn't conclude he was a woman, but
 you could certainly say he had good insights into the feminine
 mentality (if there is such a thing). Now, if a computer could fool
 someone into thinking it was a person, I guess you'd have to say
 something similar about it---that it had good insights into what it's
 like to be human, into "the human condition" (whatever that is).

*Pat:* Maybe, but that isn't necessarily equivalent to thinking, is
 it? It seems to me that passing the Turing Test would merely prove
 that some machine or other could do a very good job of simulating
 thought.

*Chris:* I couldn't agree more with Pat. We all know that fancy
 computer programs exist today for simulating all sorts of complex
 phenomena. In theoretical physics, for instance, we simulate the
 behavior of particles, atoms, solids, liquids, gases, galaxies, and
 so on. But no one confuses any of those simulations with the real
 thing!

*Sandy:* In his book /Brainstorms/, the philosopher Daniel Dennett
 makes a similar point about simulated hurricanes.

*Chris:* That's a nice example, too. Obviously, what goes on inside a
 computer when it's simulating a hurricane is not a hurricane, for the
 machine's memory doesn't get torn to bits by 200 mile-an-hour winds,
 the floor of the machine room doesn't get flooded with rainwater, and
 so on.

*Sandy:* Oh, come on---that's not a fair argument! In the first place,
 the programmers don't claim the simulation really is a
 hurricane. It's merely a simulation of certain aspects of a
 hurricane. But in the second place, you're pulling a fast one when
 you imply that there are no downpours or 200-mile-an-hour winds in a
 simulated hurricane. To us there aren't any, but if the program were
 incredibly detailed, it could include simulated people on the ground
 who would experience the wind and the rain just as we do when a
 hurricane hits. In their minds---or, if you'd rather, in their
 simulated minds---the hurricane would be not a simulation, but a
 genuine phenomenon complete with drenching and devastation.

*Chris:* Oh, my---what a science-fiction scenario! Now we're talking
 about simulating whole populations, not just a single mind!

*Sandy:* Well, look---I'm /simply/ trying to show you why your argument
 that a simulated McCoy isn't the real McCoy is fallacious. It depends
 on the tacit assumption that any old observer of the simulated
 phenomenon is equally able to assess what's going on. But in fact, it
 may take an observer with a special vantage point to recognize what
 is going on. In the hurricane case, it takes special "computational
 glasses" to see the rain and the winds.

*Pat:* "Computational glasses"? I don't know what you're talking
 about.

*Sandy:* I mean that to see the winds and the wetness of the
 hurricane, you have to be able to look at it in the proper way. You---

*Chris:* No, no, no! A simulated hurricane isn't wet! No matter how
 much it might seem wet to simulated people, it won't ever be
 genuinely wet! And no computer will ever get torn apart in the
 process of simulating winds.

*Sandy:* Certainly not, but that's irrelevant. You're just confusing
 levels. The laws of physics don't get torn apart by real hurricanes,
 either. In the case of the simulated hurricane, if you go peering at
 the computer's memory, expecting to find broken wires and so forth,
 you'll be disappointed. But look at the proper level. Look into the
 /structures/ that are coded for in memory. You'll see that many
 abstract links have been broken, many values of variables radically
 changed, and so on. /There's/ your flood, your devastation---real, only
 a little concealed, a little hard to detect.

*Chris:* I'm sorry, I just can't buy that. You're insisting that I
 look for a new kind of devastation, one never before associated with
 hurricanes. That way you could call anything a hurricane as long as
 its effects, seen through your special "glasses," could be called
 "floods and devastation."

*Sandy:* Right---you've got it exactly! You recognize a hurricane by its
 effects. You have no way of going in and finding some ethereal
 "essence of hurricane," some "hurricane soul" right in the middle of
 the storm's eye. Nor is there any ID card to be found that certifies
 "hurricanehood." It's just the existence of a certain kind of
 pattern---a spiral storm with an eye and so forth---that makes you say
 it's a hurricane. Of course, there are a lot of things you'll insist
 on before you call something a hurricane.

*Pat:* Well, wouldn't you say that being an atmospheric phenomenon is
 one prerequisite? How can anything inside a computer be a storm? To
 me, a simulation is a simulation is a simulation!

*Sandy:* Then I suppose you would say that even the calculations
 computers do are simulated---that they are fake calculations. Only
 people can do genuine calculations, right?

*Pat:* Well, computers get the right answers, so their calculations
 are not exactly fake---but they're still just patterns. There's no
 /understanding/ going on in there. Take a cash register. Can you
 honestly say that you feel it is /calculating/ something when its
 gears mesh together? And the step from cash register to computer is
 very short, as I understand things.

*Sandy:* If you mean that a cash register doesn't feel like a
schoolkid doing arithmetic problems, I'll agree. But is that what
"calculation" means? Is that an integral part of it? If so, then
contrary to what everybody has thought up till now, we'll have to
write a very complicated program indeed to perform /genuine/
calculations.  Of course, this program will sometimes get careless and
make mistakes, and it will sometimes scrawl its answers illegibly, and
it will occasionally doodle on its paper... It won't be any more
reliable than the store clerk who adds up your total by hand. Now, I
happen to believe that eventually such a program could be
written. Then we'd know something about how clerks and schoolkids
work.

*Pat:* I can't believe you'd ever be able to do that!

*Sandy:* Maybe, maybe not, but that's not my point. You say a cash
 register can't calculate. It reminds me of another favorite passage
 of mine from Dennett's /Brainstorms/. It goes something like this:
 "Cash registers can't really calculate; they can only spin their
 gears. But cash registers can't really spin their gears, either: they
 can only follow the laws of physics." Dennett said it originally
 about computers; I modified it to talk about cash registers. And you
 could use the same line of reasoning in talking about people: "People
 can't really calculate; all they can do is manipulate mental
 symbols. But they aren't really manipulating symbols: all they are
 doing is firing various neurons in various patterns. But they can't
 really make their neurons fire; they simply have to let the laws of
 physics make them fire for them." Et cetera. Don't you see how this
 /reduction ad absurdum/ would lead you to conclude that calculation
 doesn't exist, that hurricanes don't exist---in fact, that nothing at a
 level higher than particles and the laws of physic exists? What do
 you gain by saying that a computer only pushes symbols around and
 doesn't truly calculate?

*Pat:* The example may be extreme, but it makes my point that there is
 a vast difference between a real phenomenon and any simulation of
 it. This is so for hurricanes, and even more so for human thought.

*Sandy:* Look, I don't want to get too tangled up in this line of
 argument, but let me try one more example. If you were a radio ham
 listening to another ham broadcasting in Morse code and you were
 responding in Morse code, would it sound funny to you to refer to
 "the person at the other end"?

*Pat:* No, that would sound okay, although the existence of a person
 at the other end would be an assumption.

*Sandy:* Yes, but you wouldn't be likely to go and check it
 out. You're prepared to recognize personhood through those rather
 unusual channels. You don't have to see a human body or hear a
 voice. All you need is a rather abstract manifestation---a code, as it
 were. What I'm getting at is this. To "see" the person behind the
 dits and dahs, you have to be willing to do some /decoding/, some
 interpretation. It's not direct perception; it's indirect. You have
 to peel off a layer or two to find the reality hidden in there. You
 put on your "radio-ham's glasses" to "see" the person behind the
 buzzes. Just the same with the simulated hurricane! You don't see it
 darkening the machine room; you have to decode the machine's
 memory. You have to put on special "memory-decoding" glasses. /Then/
 what you see is a hurricane.

*Pat:* Oh ho ho! Talk about fast ones---wait a minute! In the case of
 the shortwave radio, there's a real person out there, somewhere in
 the Fiji Islands or wherever. My decoding act as I sit by my radio
 simply reveals that that person exists. It's like seeing a shadow and
 concluding there's an object out there, casting it. One doesn't
 confuse the shadow with the object, however! And with the hurricane
 there's no /real/ storm behind the scenes, making the computer follow
 its patterns. No, what you have is just a shadow hurricane without
 any genuine hurricane. I just refuse to confuse shadows with reality.

*Sandy:* All right. I don't want to drive this point into the
 ground. I even admit it is pretty silly to say that a simulated
 hurricane is a hurricane. But I wanted to point out that it's not as
 silly as you might think at first blush. And when you turn to
 simulated thought then you've got a very different matter on your
 hands from simulated hurricanes.

*Pat:* I don't see why. You'll have to convince me.

*Sandy:* Well, to do so, I'll first have to make a couple of extra
 points about hurricanes.

*Pat:* Oh no! Well, all right, all right.

*Sandy:* Nobody can say just exactly what a hurricane is---that is, in
totally precise terms. There's an abstract pattern that many storms
share, and it's for that reason we call those storms hurricanes. But
it's not possible to make a sharp distinction between hurricanes and
no hurricanes. There are tornados, cyclones, typhoons, dust
devils... Is the Great Red Spot on Jupiter a hurricane? Are sunspots
hurricanes? Could there be a hurricane in a wind tunnel? In a test
tube? In your imagination, you can even extend the concept of
"hurricane" to include a microscopic storm on the surface of a neutron
star.

*Chris:* That's not so far-fetched, you know. The concept of
"earthquake" has actually been extended to neutron stars. The
astrophysicists say that the tiny changes in rate that once in a while
are observed in the pulsing of a pulsar are caused by
"glitches"---starquakes---that have just occurred on the neutron
star's surface.

*Sandy:* Oh, I remember that now. That "glitch" idea has always seemed
 eerie to me---a surrealistic kind of quivering on a surrealistic kind
 of surface.

*Chris:* Can you imagine---plate tectonics on a giant sphere of pure
 nuclear matter?

*Sandy:* That's a wild thought. So, starquakes and earthquakes can
 both be subsumed into a new, more abstract category. And that's how
 science constantly extends familiar concepts, taking them further and
 further from familiar experience and yet keeping some essence
 constant. The number system is the classic example---from positive
 numbers to negative numbers, then rationale, reals, complex numbers,
 and "on beyond zebra," as Dr. Seuss says.

*Pat:* I think I can see your point, Sandy. In biology, we have many
 examples of close relationships that are established in rather
 abstract ways. Often the decision about what family some species
 belongs to comes down to an abstract pattern shared at some
 level. Even the concepts of "male" and "female" turn out to be
 surprisingly abstract and elusive. When you base your system of
 classification on very abstract patterns, I suppose that a broad
 variety of phenomena can fall into "the same class," even if in many
 superficial ways the class members are utterly unlike one another. So
 perhaps I can glimpse, at least a little, how to you, a simulated
 hurricane could, in a funny sense, /be/ a hurricane.

*Chris:* Perhaps the word that's being extended is not "hurricane,"
 but "be."

*Pat:* How so?

*Chris:* If Turing can extend the verb "think," can't I extend the
 verb "be"? All I mean is that when simulated things are deliberately
 confused with genuine things, somebody's doing a lot of philosophical
 wool pulling. It's a lot more serious than just extending a few
 nouns, such as "hurricane."

*Sandy:* I like your idea that "be" is being extended, but I sure
 don't agree with you about the wool pulling. Anyway, if you don't
 object, let me just say one more thing about simulated hurricanes and
 then I'll get to simulated minds. Suppose you consider a really deep
 simulation of a hurricane---I mean a simulation of every atom, which I
 admit is sort of ridiculous, but still, just consider it for the sake
 of argument.

*Pat:* Okay.

*Sandy:* I hope you would agree that it would then share all the
 abstract structure that defines the "essence of hurricanehood." So
 what's to keep you from calling it a hurricane?

*Pat:* I thought you were backing off from that claim of equality.

*Sandy:* So did I, but then these examples came up, and I was forced
 back to my claim. But let me back off, as I said I would do, and get
 back to thought, which is the real issue here. Thought, even more
 than hurricanes, is an abstract structure, a way of describing some
 complex events that happen in a medium called a brain. But actually,
 thought can take place in any one of several billion brains. There
 are all these physically very different brains, and yet they all
 support "the same thing": thinking. What's important, then, is the
 abstract /pattern/, not the medium. The same kind of swirling can
 happen inside any of them, so no person can claim to think more
 "genuinely" than any other. Now, if we come up with some new kind of
 medium in which the /same style/ of swirling takes place, could you
 deny that thinking is taking place in it?

*Pat:* Probably not, but you have just shifted the question. The
 question now is: How can you determine whether the "same style" of
 swirling is really happening?

*Sandy:* The beauty of the Turing Test is that it /tells/ you when!
 Don't you see?

*Chris:* I don't see that at all. How would you know that the same
 style of activity was going on inside a computer as inside my mind,
 simply because it answered questions as I do? All you're looking at
 is its outside.

*Sandy:* I'm sorry, I disagree entirely! How do you know that when I
 speak to you, anything similar to what you call thinking is going on
 inside me? The Turing Test is a fantastic probe, something like a
 particle accelerator in physics. Here, Chris---I think you'll like this
 analogy. Just as in physics, when you want to understand what is
 going on at an atomic or subatomic level, since you can't see it
 directly, you scatter accelerated particles off a target and observe
 their behavior. From this, you infer the internal nature of the
 target. The Turing Test extends this idea to the mind. It treats the
 mind as a "target" that is not directly visible but whose structure
 can be deduced more abstractly. By "scattering" questions off a
 target mind, you learn about its internal workings, just as in
 physics.

*Chris:* Well... to be more exact, you can /hypothesize/ about what
 kinds of internal structures might account for the behavior
 observed---but please remember that they may or may not in fact exist.

*Sandy:* Hold on, now! Are you suggesting that atomic nuclei are
 merely hypothetical entities? After all, their existence (or should I
 say /hypothetical/ existence?) was proved (or should I say
 /suggested/?) by the behavior of particles scattered off atoms.

*Chris:* I would agree, but you know, physical systems seem to me to
 be much simpler than the mind, and the certainty of the inferences
 made is correspondingly greater. And the conclusions are confirmed
 over and over again by different types of experiments.

*Sandy:* Yes, but those experiments still are of the same
 sort---scattering, detecting things indirectly. You can never /handle/
 an electron or a quark. Physics experiments are also correspondingly
 harder to do and to interpret. Often they take years and years, and
 dozens of collaborators are involved. In the Turing Test, though,
 just one person could perform many highly delicate experiments in the
 course of no more than an hour. I maintain that people give other
 people credit for being conscious simply because of their continual
 external monitoring of other people---which is itself something like a
 Turing Test.

*Pat:* That may be roughly true, but it involves more than just
 conversing with people through a teletype. We see that other people
 have bodies, we watch their faces and expressions---we see they are
 human beings, and so we think they think.

*Sandy:* To me, that seems a narrow, anthropocentric view of what
 thought is. Does that mean you would sooner say a mannequin in a
 store thinks than a wonderfully programmed computer, simply because
 the mannequin looks more human?

*Pat:* Obviously, I would need more than just vague physical
 resemblance to the human form to be willing to attribute the power of
 thought to an entity. But that organic quality, the sameness of
 origin, undeniably lends a degree of credibility that is very
 important.

*Sandy:* Here we disagree. I find this simply too chauvinistic. I feel
 that the key thing is a similarity of /internal/ structure---not
 bodily, organic, chemical structure but /organizational/ structure
 software. Whether an entity can think seems to me a question of
 whether its organization can be described in a certain way, and I'm
 perfectly willing to believe that the Turing Test detects the
 presence or absence of that mode of organization. I would say that
 your depending on my physical body as evidence that I am a thinking
 being is rather shallow. The way I see it, the Turing Test looks far
 deeper than at mere external form.

*Pat:* Hey now---you're not giving me much credit. It's not just the
 shape of a body that lends weight to the idea that there's real
 thinking going on inside. It's also, as I said, the idea of common
 origin. It's the idea that you and I both sprang from DNA molecules,
 an idea to which I attribute much depth. Put it this way: the
 external form of human bodies reveals that they share a deep
 biological history, and it's that depth that lends a lot of
 credibility to the notion that the owner of such a body can think.

*Sandy:* But that is all indirect evidence. Surely you want some
 /direct/ evidence. That's what the Turing Test is for. And I think
 it's the /only/ way to test for thinkinghood.

*Chris:* But you could be fooled by the Turing Test, just as an
 interrogator could mistake a man for a woman.

*Sandy:* I admit, I could be fooled if I carried out the test in too
 quick or too shallow a way. But I would go for the deepest things I
 could think of.

*Chris:* I would want to see if the program could understand jokes---or
 better yet, make them! /That/ would be a real test of intelligence.

*Sandy:* I agree that humor probably is an acid test for a supposedly
intelligent program, but equally important to me---perhaps more
so---would be to test its emotional responses. So I would ask it about
its reactions to certain pieces of music or works of
literature---especially my favorite ones. [fn::Philip K. Dick's /Do
Androids Dream of Electric Sheep?/, and the movie-adaptation /Blade
Runner/, have a test like this called the [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Voight-Kampff_machine#Voight-Kampff_machine][Voight-Kampff machine]]. For
example, "You're in a desert walking along in the sand when all of the
sudden you look down, and you see a tortoise, it's crawling toward
you. You reach down, you flip the tortoise over on its back. The
tortoise lays on its back, its belly baking in the hot sun, beating
its legs trying to turn itself over, but it can't, not without your
help. But you're not helping. Why is that?"]

*Chris:* What if it said, "I don't know that piece," or even, "I have
 no interest in music"? What if it tried its hardest (oops!---sorry,
 Pat!)... Let me try that again. What if it did everything it could,
 to steer clear of emotional topics and references?

*Sandy:* That would certainly make me suspicious. Any consistent
 pattern of avoiding certain issues would raise serious doubts in my
 mind as to whether I was dealing with a thinking being.

*Chris:* Why do you say that? Why not just conclude you're dealing
 with a thinking but unemotional being?

*Sandy:* You've hit upon a sensitive point. I've thought about this
 for quite a long time, and I've concluded that I simply can't believe
 emotions and thought can be divorced. To put it another way, I think
 emotions are an automatic by-product of the ability to think. They
 are entailed by the very nature of thought.

*Chris:* That's an interesting conclusion, but what if you're wrong?
 What if I produced a machine that could think but not emote? Then its
 intelligence might go unrecognized because it failed to pass your
 kind of test.

*Sandy:* I'd like you to point out to me where the boundary line
 between emotional questions and nonemotional ones lies. You might
 want to ask about the meaning of a great novel. This certainly
 requires an understanding of human emotions! Now is that thinking, or
 merely cool calculation? You might want to ask about a subtle choice
 of words. For that, you need an understanding of their
 connotations. Turing uses examples like this in his article. You
 might want to ask for advice about a complex romantic situation. The
 machine would need to know a lot about human motivations and their
 roots. If it failed at this kind of task, I would not be much
 inclined to say that it could think. As far as I'm concerned,
 thinking, feeling, and consciousness are just different facets of one
 phenomenon, and no one of them can be present without the others.

*Chris:* Why couldn't you build a machine that could feel nothing (we
 all know machines don't feel anything!), but that could think and
 make complex decisions anyway? I don't see any contradiction there.

*Sandy:* Well, I do. I think that when you say that, you are
 visualizing a metallic, rectangular machine, probably in an
 airconditioned room---a hard, angular, cold object with a million
 colored wires inside it, a machine that sits stock still on a tiled
 floor, humming or buzzing or whatever, and spinning its tapes. Such a
 machine can play a good game of chess, which, I freely admit,
 involves a lot of decision making. And yet I would never call it
 conscious.

*Chris:* How come? To mechanists, isn't a chess-playing machine
 rudimentarily conscious?

*Sandy:* Not to /this/ mechanist! The way I see it, consciousness has
 got to come from a precise pattern of organization, one we haven't
 yet figured out how to describe in any detailed way. But I believe we
 will gradually come to understand it. In my view, consciousness
 requires a certain way of mirroring the external universe internally,
 and the ability to respond to that external reality on the basis of
 the internally represented model. And then in addition, what's really
 crucial for a conscious machine is that it should incorporate a
 well-developed and flexible self-model. And it's there that all
 existing programs, including the best chess-playing ones, fall down.

*Chris:* Don't chess programs look ahead and say to themselves as
 they're figuring out their next move, "if my opponent moves here,
 then I'll go there, and then if they go this way, I could go below
 that way..."? Doesn't that usage of the concept "I" require a sort of
 self-model?

*Sandy:* Not really. Or, if you want, it's an extremely limited
one. It's an understanding of self in only the narrowest sense. For
instance, a chess-playing program has no concept of why it is playing
chess, or of the fact that it is a program, or is in a computer, or
has a human opponent. It has no idea about what winning and losing
are, or---

*Pat:* How do /you/ know it has no such sense? How can /you/ presume
 to say what a chess program feels or knows?

*Sandy:* Oh come on! We all know that certain things don't feel
 anything or know anything. A thrown stone doesn't know anything about
 parabolas, and a whirling fan doesn't know anything about air. It's
 true I can't /prove/ those statements---but here we are verging on
 questions of faith.

*Pat:* This reminds me of a Taoist story I read. It goes something
 like this. Two sages were standing on a bridge over a stream. One
 said to the other, "I wish I were a fish. They are so happy." The
 other replied, "How do you know whether fish are happy or not? You're
 not a fish!" The first said, "But you're not me, so how do you know
 whether I know how fish feel?"

*Sandy:* Beautiful! Talking about consciousness really does call for a
 certain amount of restraint. Otherwise, you might as well just jump
 on the solipsism bandwagon ("I am the only conscious being in the
 universe") or the panpsychism bandwagon ("/Everything/ in the
 universe is conscious!").

*Pat:* Well, how do you know? Maybe everything is conscious.

*Sandy:* Oh Pat, if you're going to join the club that maintains that
 stones and even particles like electrons have some sort of
 consciousness, then I guess we part company here. That's a kind of
 mysticism I just can't fathom. As for chess programs, I happen to
 know how they work, and I can tell you for sure that they aren't
 conscious. No way!

*Pat:* Why not?

*Sandy:* They incorporate only the barest knowledge about the goals of
 chess. The notion of "playing" is turned into the mechanical act of
 comparing a lot of numbers and choosing the biggest one over and over
 again. A chess program has no sense of disappointment about losing,
 or pride in winning. Its self-model is very crude. It gets away with
 doing the least it can, just enough to play a game of chess and
 nothing more. Yet interestingly enough, we still tend to talk about
 the "desires" of a chess-playing computer. We say, "it wants to keep
 its king behind a row of pawns" or "it likes to get its rooks out
 early" or "it thinks I don't see that hidden fork."

*Pat:* Yes, and we do the same thing with insects. We spot a lonely
ant somewhere and say, "It's trying to get hack home" or "It wants to
drag that dead bee back to the colony." In fact, with any animal we
use terms that indicate emotions, but we don't know for certain how
much the animal feels. [fn::Dennett again, in his book /The
Intentional Stance/: "What concept of a predator does the frog have?
Can we distinguish between its believing that a predator is behind it
and believing (more vaguely) that a thing-to-avoid is behind it?
[...] And yet this anthropomorphizing way of organizing and
simplifying our expectations about the frog's next moves is compelling
and useful. Treating frogs, birds, monkeys, dolphins, lobsters,
honey-bees---and not just men, women, and children---from the
intentional stance not only comes naturally, but also works extremely
well within its narrow range. Try catching frogs without it."] I have
no trouble talking about dogs and cats being happy or sad, having
desires and beliefs and so on, but of course I don't think their
sadness is as deep or complex as human sadness is.

*Sandy:* But you wouldn't call it "simulated" sadness,

*Pat:* No, of course not. I think it's real.

*Sandy:* It's hard to avoid use of such teleological or mentalistic
 terms. I believe they're quite justified, although they shouldn't be
 carried too far. They simply don't have the same richness of meaning
 when applied to present-day chess programs as when applied to people.

*Chris:* I still can't see that intelligence has to involve
 emotions. Why couldn't you imagine an intelligence that simply
 calculates and has no feelings?

*Sandy:* A couple of answers here. Number one, any intelligence has to
have motivations. It's simply not the case, whatever many people may
think, that machines could think any more "objectively" than people
do. Machines, when they look at a scene, will have to focus and filter
that scene down into some preconceived categories, just as a person
does. And that means seeing some things and missing others. It means
giving more weight to some things than to others. This happens on
every level of processing. [fn::Marvin Minsky talks about how emotion
is rational because it helps us focus on what's important. See the
podcast linked in the [[./emotions.html][Emotions and intelligence]] lecture notes.]

*Pat:* I'm not sure I'm following you.

*Sandy:* Take me right now, for instance. You might think I'm just
 making some intellectual points, and I wouldn't need emotions to do
 that. But what makes me /care/ about these points? Just now---why did I
 stress the word "care" so heavily? Because I'm emotionally involved
 in this conversation! People talk to each other out of conviction---not
 out of hollow, mechanical reflexes. Even the most intellectual
 conversation is driven by underlying passions. There's an emotional
 undercurrent to every conversation---it's the fact that the speakers
 want to be listened to, understood, and respected for what they are
 saying.

*Pat:* It sounds to me as if all you're saying is that people need to
 be interested in what they're saying. Otherwise, a conversation dies.

*Sandy:* Right! I wouldn't bother to talk to anyone if I weren't
motivated by /interest/. And "interest" is just another name for a
whole constellation of subconscious biases. When I talk, all my biases
work together, and what you perceive on the surface level is my
personality, my style. But that style arises from an immense number of
tiny priorities, biases, leanings. When you add up a million of them
interacting together, you get something that amounts to a lot of
desires. It just all adds up! And that brings me to the other answer
to Chris's question about feelingless calculation. Sure, that
exists---in a cash register, a pocket calculator. I'd say it's even
true of all today's computer programs. But eventually, when you put
enough feelingless calculations together in a huge coordinated
organization, you'll get something that has properties on another
level. You can see it---in fact, you have to see it---not as a bunch
of little calculations but as a system of tendencies and desires and
beliefs and so on. *When things get complicated enough, you're*
#+BEGIN_HTML
<b><i>forced</i></b>
#+END_HTML
*to change your level of description.* [fn::cf. [[./knowledge-level.html][The knowledge level]]
lecture notes] To some extent that's already happening, which is why
we use words such as "want," "think," "try," and "hope" to describe
chess programs and other attempts at mechanical thought. Dennett calls
that kind of level switch by the observer "adapting the intentional
stance." The really interesting things in AI will only begin to
happen, I'd guess, when the program /itself/ adopts the intentional
stance toward itself!

*Chris:* That would be a very strange sort of level-crossing feedback
 loop.

*Sandy:* It certainly would. When a program looks at itself from the
 outside, as it were, and tries to figure out why it acted the way it
 did, then I'll start to think that there's someone in there, doing
 the looking.

*Pat:* You mean an "I"? A self?

*Sandy:* Yes, something like that. A soul, even---although not in any
 religious sense. Of course, it's highly premature for anyone to adopt
 the intentional stance (in the full force of the term) with respect
 to today's programs. At least that's my opinion.

*Chris:* For me an important related question is: To what extent is it
 valid to adopt the intentional stance toward beings other than
 humans?

*Pat:* I would certainly adopt the intentional stance toward mammals.

*Sandy:* I vote for that.

*Chris:* Now that's interesting. How can that be, Sandy? Surely you
 wouldn't claim that a dog or cat can pass the Turing Test? Yet don't
 you maintain the Turing Test is the only way to test for the presence
 of consciousness? How can you have these beliefs simultaneously?

*Sandy:* Hmm... All right. I guess that my argument is really just
 that the Turing Test works only above a certain level of
 consciousness. I'm perfectly willing to grant that there can be
 thinking beings that could fail at the Turing Test---but the main point
 that I've been arguing for is that anything that passes it would be a
 genuinely conscious, thinking being.

*Pat:* How can you think of a computer as a conscious being? I
 apologize if what I'm going to say sounds like a stereotype, but when
 I think of conscious beings, I just can't connect that thought with
 machines. To me, consciousness is connected with soft, warm bodies,
 silly though it may sound.

*Chris:* That does sound odd, coming from a biologist. Don't you deal
 with life so much in terms of chemistry and physics that all magic
 seems to vanish?

*Pat:* Not really. Sometimes the chemistry and physics simply increase
 the feeling that there's something magical going on down there!
 Anyway, I can't always integrate my scientific knowledge with my gut
 feelings.

*Chris:* I guess I share that trait.

*Pat:* So how do you deal with rigid preconceptions like mine?

*Sandy:* I'd try to dig down under the surface of your concept of
"machine" and get at the intuitive connotations that lurk there, out
of sight but deeply influencing your opinions. I think we all have a
holdover image from the Industrial Revolution that sees machines as
clunky iron contraptions gawkily moving under the power of some loudly
chugging engine. Possibly that's even how the computer inventor
Charles Babbage saw people! After all, he called his magnificent
many-geared computer the "Analytical Engine." [fn::Wikipedia has a
good entry about the [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Analytical_Engine][Analytical Engine]].]

*Pat:* Well, I certainly don't think people are just fancy steam
 shovels or electric can openers. There's something about people,
 something that---that---they've got a sort of /flame/ inside them,
 something alive, something that flickers unpredictably, wavering,
 uncertain---but something /creative/!

*Sandy:* Great! That's just the sort of thing I wanted to hear. It's
 very human to think that way. Your flame image makes me think of
 candles, of fires, of vast thunderstorms with lightning dancing all
 over the sky in crazy, tumultuous patterns. But do you realize that
 just that kind of thing is visible on a computer's console? The
 flickering lights form amazing chaotic sparkling patterns. It's such
 a far cry from heaps of lifeless, clanking metal! It /is/ flamelike,
 by God! Why don't you let the word "machine" conjure up images of
 dancing patterns of light rather than of giant steam shovels?

*Chris:* That's a beautiful image, Sandy. It does tend to change my
 sense of mechanism from being matter-oriented to being
 pattern-oriented. It makes me try to visualize the thoughts in my
 mind---these thoughts right now, even!---as a huge spray of tiny
 pulses flickering in my brain.

*Sandy:* That's quite a poetic self-portrait for a mere spray of
 flickers to have come up with!

*Chris:* Thank you. But still, I'm not totally convinced that a
 machine is all that I am. I admit, my concept of machines probably
 does suffer from anachronistic subconscious flavors, but I'm afraid I
 can't change such a deeply rooted sense in a flash.

*Sandy:* At least you sound open-minded. And to tell the truth, part
 of me sympathizes with the way you and Pat view machines. Part of me
 balks at calling myself a machine. It is a bizarre thought that a
 feeling being like you or me might emerge from mere circuitry. Do I
 surprise you?

*Chris:* You certainly surprise /me/. So, tell us---do you believe in
 the idea of an intelligent computer, or don't you?

*Sandy:* It all depends on what you mean. We've all heard the question
 "Can computers think?" There are several possible interpretations of
 this (aside from the many interpretations of the word "think"). They
 revolve around different meanings of the wards "can" and "computer."

*Pat:* Back to word games again...

*Sandy:* I'm sorry, but that's unavoidable. First of all, the question
might mean, "Does some present-day computer think, right now?" To this
I would immediately answer with a loud no. Then it could be taken to
mean, "Could some present-day computer, if suitably programmed,
potentially think?" That would be more like it, but I would still
answer, "Probably not." The real difficulty hinges on the word
"computer." The way I see it, "computer" calls up an image of just
what I described earlier: an air-conditioned room with cold
rectangular metal boxes in it. But I suspect that with increasing
public familiarity with computers and continued progress in computer
architecture, that vision will eventually become
outmoded. [fn::cf. [[./beyond-agents.html][Beyond intelligent agents]] lecture notes]

*Pat:* Don't you think computers as we know them will be around for a
 while?

*Sandy:* Sure, there will have to be computers in today's image around
 for a long time, but advanced computers---maybe no longer called
 "computers"---will evolve and become quite different. Probably, as with
 living organisms, there will be many branchings in the evolutionary
 tree. There will be computers for business, computers for schoolkids,
 computers for scientific calculations, computers for systems
 research, computers for simulation, computers for rockets going into
 space, and so on. Finally, there will be computers for the study of
 intelligence, It's really only these last that I'm thinking of---the
 ones with the maximum flexibility, the ones that people are
 deliberately attempting to make smart. I see no reason that these
 will stay fixed in the traditional image. They probably will soon
 acquire as standard features some rudimentary sensory systems mostly
 for vision and hearing, at first. They will need to be able to move
 around, to explore. They will have to be physically flexible. In
 short, they will have to become more animal-like, more self-reliant.

*Chris:* It makes me think of the robots R2D2 and C3P0 in the movie
 Star Wars.

*Sandy:* Not me! In fact, I don't think of anything remotely like them
 when I visualize intelligent machines. They are too silly, too much
 the product of a film designer's imagination. Not that I have a clear
 vision of my own. But I think it's necessary, if people are
 realistically going to try to imagine an artificial intelligence, to
 go beyond the limited, hard-edged picture of computers that comes
 from exposure to what we have today. The only thing all machines will
 always have in common is their underlying mechanicalness. That may
 sound cold and inflexible, but then---just think---what could be more
 mechanical, in a wonderful way, than the workings of the DNA and
 proteins and organelles in our cells?

*Pat:* To me, what goes on inside cells has a "wet," "slippery" feel
 to it, and what goes on inside machines is dry and rigid. It's
 connected with the fact that computers don't make mistakes, that
 computers do only what you tell them to do. Or at least that's my
 image of computers.

*Sandy:* Funny---a minute ago, your image was of a flame, and now it's
 of something wet and slippery. Isn't it marvelous, how contradictory
 we can be?

*Pat:* I don't need your sarcasm.

*Sandy:* No, no, I'm not being sarcastic---I really do think it's
 marvelous.

*Pat:* It's just an example of the human mind's slippery nature---mine,
 in this case.

*Sandy:* True. But your image of computers is stuck in a
 rut. Computers certainly can make mistakes---and I don't mean on the
 hardware level. Think of any present-day computer predicting the
 weather. It can make wrong predictions, even though its program runs
 flawlessly.

*Pat:* But that's only because you've fed it the wrong data.

*Sandy:* Not so. It's because weather prediction is too complex. Any
such program has to make do with a limited amount of data---entirely
correct data---and extrapolate from there. Sometimes it will make
wrong predictions. It's no different from a farmer gazing at the
clouds and saying, "I reckon we'll get a little snow tonight." In our
heads, we make models of things and use those models to guess how the
world will behave. We have to make do with our models, however
inaccurate they may be, or evolution will prune us out
ruthlessly---we'll fall off a cliff or something. [fn::"One utterly
central---if not defining---feature of an intelligent being is that it
can 'look before it leaps.' Better, it can think before it
leaps. Intelligence is (at least partly) a matter of using well what
you know---but for what? For improving the fidelity of your
expectations about what is going to happen next, for planning, for
considering courses of action, for framing further hypotheses with the
aim of increasing the knowledge you will use in the future, so that
you can preserver yourself, by letting your hypotheses die in your
stead (as Sir Karl Popper once put it). The stupid---as opposed to
ignorant---being is the one who lights the match to peer into the fuel
tank, who saws off the limb he is sitting on, who locks his keys in
his car and then spends the next hour wondering how on earth to get
his family out of the car." --- Dennett, /Cognitive Wheels: The frame
problem of AI/; more about the frame problem in the [[./frame-problem.html][lecture notes.]]] And
for intelligent computers, it'll be the same. It's just that human
designers will speed up the evolutionary process by aiming explicitly
at the goal of creating intelligence, which is something nature just
stumbled on.

*Pat:* So you think computers will be making fewer mistakes as they
 get smarter?

*Sandy:* Actually, just the other way around! The smarter they get,
 the more they'll be in a position to tackle messy real-life domains,
 so they'll be more and more likely to have inaccurate models. To me,
 mistake making is a sign of high intelligence!

*Pat:* Wow---you throw me sometimes!

*Sandy:* I guess I'm a strange sort of advocate for machine
intelligence. To some degree I straddle the fence. I think that
machines won't really be intelligent in a humanlike way until they
have something like your biological wetness or slipperiness to them. I
don't mean literally wet---the slipperiness could be in the
software. [fn:: Hofstadter's "slip" in analogy software] But
biological seeming or not, intelligent machines will in any case be
machines. We will have designed them, built them---or grown them!
We'll understand how they work---at least in some sense. Possibly no
one person will really understand them, but collectively we will know
how they work. [fn::Bill Joy and Danny Hillis, major architects behind
the early internet, discuss in this [[http://www.scientificamerican.com/podcast/episode.cfm?id=the-coming-entanglement-bill-joy-an-12-02-15][Scientific American podcast]] how
the internet has grown beyond any single person's ability to
understand it.]

*Pat:* It sounds like you want to have your cake and eat it too. I
mean, you want to have people able to build intelligent machines and
yet at the same time have some of the mystery of mind remain.

*Sandy:* You're absolutely right---and I think that's what will
 happen. When /real/ artificial intelligence comes---

*Pat:* Now there's a nice contradiction in terms!

*Sandy:* Touche! Well, anyway, when it comes, it will be mechanical
 and yet at the same time organic. It will have that same astonishing
 flexibility that we see in life's mechanisms. And when I say
 mechanisms, I mean mechanisms. DNA and enzymes and so on really are
 mechanical and rigid and reliable. Wouldn't you agree, Pat?

*Pat:* Sure! But when they work together, a lot of unexpected things
happen. There are so many complexities and rich modes of behavior that
all that mechanicalness adds up to something very
fluid. [fn::cf. [[./beyond-agents.html][Beyond agents]] lecture notes, specifically the section
about "Emergent intelligence"]]

*Sandy:* For me, it's an almost unimaginable transition from the
 mechanical level of molecules to the living level of cells. But it's
 that exposure to biology that convinces me that people are
 machines. That thought makes me uncomfortable in some ways, but in
 other ways it is exhilarating.

*Chris:* I have one nagging question... If people are machines, how
 come it's so hard to convince them of the fact? Surely a machine
 ought to be able to recognize its own machinehood!

*Sandy:* It's an interesting question. You have to allow for emotional
 factors here. To be told you're a machine is, in a way, to be told
 that you're nothing more than your physical parts, and it brings you
 face to face with your own vulnerability, destructibility, and,
 ultimately, your mortality. That's something nobody finds easy to
 face. But beyond this emotional objection, to see yourself as a
 machine, you have to "unadopt" the intentional stance you've grown up
 taking toward yourself---you have to jump all the way from the level
 where the complex lifelike activities take place to the bottommost
 mechanical level where ribosomes chug along RNA strands, for
 instance. But there are so many intermediate layers that they act as
 a shield, and the mechanical quality way down there becomes almost
 invisible. I think that when intelligent machines come around, that's
 how they will seem to us---and to themselves! Their mechanicalness will
 be buried so deep that they'll seem to be alive and conscious---just as
 we seem alive and conscious...

*Chris:* You're baiting me! But I'm not going to bite.

*Pat:* I once heard a funny idea about what will happen when we
 eventually have intelligent machines. When we try to implant that
 intelligence into devices we'd like to control, their behavior won't
 be so predictable.

*Sandy:* They'll have a quirky little "flame" inside, maybe?

*Pat:* Maybe.

*Chris:* And what's so funny about that?

*Pat:* Well, think of military missiles. The more sophisticated their
 target-tracking computers get, according to this idea, the less
 predictably they will function. Eventually, you'll have missiles that
 will decide they are pacifists and will turn around and go home and
 land quietly without blowing up. We could even have "smart bullets"
 that turn around in midflight because they don't want to commit
 suicide! [fn:: EOATIN SHRDLU]

*Sandy:* What a nice vision!

*Chris:* I'm very skeptical about all this. Still, Sandy, I'd like to
 hear your predictions about when intelligent machines will come to
 be.

*Sandy:* It won't be for a long time, probably, that we'll see
anything remotely resembling the level of human intelligence. It rests
on too awesomely complicated a substrate---the brain---for us to be
able to duplicate it in the foreseeable future. [fn::cf. The "Blue
Brain Project" ([[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blue_Brain_Project][Wikipedia entry]])] Anyhow, that's my opinion.

*Pat:* Do you think a program will ever pass the Turing Test?

*Sandy:* That's a pretty hard question. I guess there are various
 degrees of passing such a test, when you come down to it. It's not
 black and white. First of all, it depends on who the interrogator
 is. A simpleton might be totally taken in by some programs today. But
 secondly, it depends on how deeply you are allowed to probe.

*Pat:* You could have a range of Turing Tests---one-minute versions,
 five-minute versions, hour-long versions, and so forth. Wouldn't it
 be interesting if some official organization sponsored a periodic
 competition, like the annual computer-chess championships, for
 programs to try to pass the Turing Test? [fn:: Loebner Prize]

*Chris:* The program that lasted the longest against some panel of
 distinguished judges would be the winner. Perhaps there could be a
 big prize for the first program that fools a famous judge for, say,
 ten minutes.

*Pat:* A prize for the program, or for its author.

*Chris:* For the program, of course!

*Pat:* That's ridiculous! What would a program do with a prize?

*Chris:* Come now, Pat. If a program's human enough to fool the
 judges, don't you think it's human enough to enjoy the prize? That's
 precisely the threshold where it, rather than its creators, deserves
 the credit, and the rewards. Wouldn't you agree?

*Pat:* Yeah, yeah---especially if the prize is an evening out on the
 town, dancing with the interrogators!

*Sandy:* I'd certainly like to see something like that established. I
 think it could be hilarious to watch the first programs flop
 pathetically!

*Pat:* You're pretty skeptical for an AI advocate, aren't you? Well,
 do you think any computer program today could pass a five minute
 Turing Test, given a sophisticated interrogator?

*Sandy:* I seriously doubt it. It's partly because no one is really
working at it explicitly. I should mention, though, that there is one
program whose inventors claim it has already passed a rudimentary
version of the Turing Test. It is called "Parry," [fn:: [[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PARRY][Wikipedia
entry]]] and in a series of remotely conducted interviews, it fooled
several psychiatrists who were told they were talking to either a
computer or a paranoid patient. This was an improvement over an
earlier version, in which psychiatrists were simply handed transcripts
of short interviews and asked to determine which ones were with a
genuine paranoid and which ones were with a computer simulation.

*Pat:* You mean they didn't have the chance to ask any questions?
 That's a severe handicap---and it doesn't seem in the spirit of the
 Turing Test. Imagine someone trying to tell which sex I belong to,
 just by reading a transcript of a few remarks by me. It might be very
 hard! I'm glad the procedure has been improved.

*Chris:* How do you get a computer to act like a paranoid?

*Sandy:* Now just a moment---I didn't say it does act like a paranoid,
 only that some psychiatrists, under unusual circumstances, thought
 so. One of the things that bothered me about this pseudoTuring Test
 is the way Parry works. "He," as the people who designed it call it,
 acts like a paranoid in that "he" gets abruptly defensive and veers
 away from undesirable topics in the conversation. In effect, Parry
 maintains strict control so that no one can truly probe "him." For
 reasons like this, simulating a paranoid is a whole lot easier than
 simulating a normal person.

*Pat:* I wouldn't doubt that. It reminds me of the joke about the
 easiest kind of human being for a computer program to simulate.

*Chris:* What is that?

*Pat:* A catatonic patient---they just sit and do nothing at all for
 days on end. Even I could write a computer program to do that!

*Sandy:* An interesting thing about Parry is that it creates no
 sentences on its own---it merely selects from a huge repertoire of
 canned sentences the one that in some sense responds best to the
 input sentence.

*Pat:* Amazing. But that would probably be impossible on a larger
 scale, wouldn't it?

*Sandy:* You better believe it (to use a canned remark)! Actually,
this is something that's really not appreciated enough. The number of
sentences you'd need to store in order to be able to respond in a
normal way to all possible turns that a conversation could take is
more than astronomical---it's really unimaginable. And they would have
to be so intricately indexed, for retrieval... Anybody [fn::
Specifically, John Searle, who described "The Chinese Room Experiment"
which behaves exactly as Sandy is describing. See the corresponding
[[./chinese-room.html][lecture notes]].] who thinks that somehow a program could be rigged up
just to pull sentences out of storage like records in a jukebox, and
that this program could pass the Turing Test, hasn't thought very hard
about it. The funny part is that it is just this kind of unrealizable
"parrot program" that most critics of artificial intelligence cite,
when they argue against the concept of the Turing Test. Instead of
imagining a truly intelligent machine, they want you to envision a
gigantic, lumbering robot that intones canned sentences in a dull
monotone. They set up the imagery in a contradictory way. They manage
to convince you that you could see through to its mechanical level
with ease, even as it is simultaneously performing tasks that we think
of as fluid, intelligent processes. Then the critics say, "You see! A
machine could pass the Turing Test and yet it would still be just a
mechanical device, not intelligent at all." I see things almost the
opposite way. If /I/ were shown a machine that can do things that I
can do---I mean pass the Turing Test---then, instead of feeling
insulted or threatened, I'd chime in with philosopher Raymond Smullyan
and say, "How wonderful machines are!"

*Chris:* If you could ask a computer just one question in the Turing
 Test, what would it be?

*Sandy:* Uhmm...

*Pat:* How about this: "If you could ask a computer just one question
 in the Turing Test, what would it be?"

-----
